.TH RNM 1 "2026-05-24" "rnm" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
rnm \- normalize file and directory names recursively
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rnm
.RI [ OPTIONS ] " TARGET_DIR"
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rnm
renames files and directories under a single
.I TARGET_DIR
recursively. Names are split into alphanumeric words, camel-case boundaries
are recognized, non-alphanumeric separators are discarded, and the result is
written using the selected case style. The default style is
.BR kebab-case .
File extensions are preserved as extensions and lowercased, except with
.B screaming-snake-case
where extensions are uppercased.
.PP
Directories are processed deepest first so children can be renamed before
their parent directories. Existing targets are never overwritten. Hidden
entries are ignored unless explicitly included via configuration.
.PP
The built-in exclude list skips
.BR .git ,
.BR LICENSE* ,
and
.BR README* .
.PP
.I TARGET_DIR
is required unless using a maintenance or help option.
.PP
Options may appear before or after
.IR TARGET_DIR .
Use
.B --
to stop option processing and treat all remaining arguments as paths.
Only one target directory is accepted.
.PP
Rename operations must not be run as root. Use a regular user account for
.BR rnm .
Maintenance options such as
.BR --install
and
.BR --update
follow the same install safety rules as documented under
.BR Maintenance .
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Execution
.TP
.BR -d ", " --dry-run
Show what would be renamed without changing anything.
.TP
.B --disable-log
Disable file logging for this run.
.TP
.B --rollback
Execute the latest rollback script and remove it after successful execution.
.B rnm
always writes the latest non-dry-run rename rollback to
.I ~/.local/state/rnm/rnm-rollback.sh
(or
.BR XDG_STATE_HOME /rnm/rnm-rollback.sh
when set). Each new rename replaces the previous rollback script.
.SS Case style
.TP
.BR --camel-case
Use
.BR camelCase
for renamed items.
.TP
.BR --pascal-case
Use
.BR PascalCase
for renamed items.
.TP
.BR --snake-case
Use
.BR snake_case
for renamed items.
.TP
.BR --screaming-snake-case
Use
.BR SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE
for renamed items.
.TP
.BR --kebab-case
Use
.BR kebab-case
for renamed items (default).
.SS Maintenance
.TP
.BR --install-completions " " MODE
Select which shell completions are installed or updated. Valid modes are
.BR bash ,
.BR fish ,
.BR zsh ,
.BR nu ,
.BR all ,
and
.BR detect .
The default is
.BR detect ,
which installs completions only for shells whose binaries are detected on the
system. Explicit shell modes and
.B all
install the requested completion files even if the shell binary is not present.
When used without another maintenance action, this option installs only the
selected completion files.
.TP
.BR -i ", " --install
Install the binary, man page, and selected shell completions. Existing files are
left unchanged.
.TP
.BR -r ", " --reinstall
Replace the installed binary, man page, and selected shell completions with the
current files.
.TP
.BR -u ", " --update
Update the installed binary, man page, and selected shell completions only when
the source and destination differ. The comparison uses
.B cmp
before writing, so unchanged files are skipped without copying.
.TP
.BR -x ", " --uninstall
Remove the installed binary, man page, and all known shell completions.
.TP
.BR -p ", " --purge
Remove the installed binary, man page, all known shell completions, and
configuration file.
.TP
.BR -c ", " --gen-config
Generate a default configuration file and exit.
.SS Help
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Show this manual page.
.SH INSTALL PATHS
.TP
.B Binary
.I ~/.local/bin/rnm
.TP
.B Man page
.I ~/.local/share/man/man1/rnm.1
.SH CONFIGURATION
The configuration file is stored at:
.PP
.I ~/.config/rnm/config
.PP
Settings:
.TP
.B case
Controls the case style. Valid values:
.BR default ,
.BR camel-case ,
.BR pascal-case ,
.BR snake-case ,
.BR screaming-snake-case ,
.BR kebab-case .
.B default
is an alias for
.BR kebab-case .
.TP
.B disable-log
Set to
.BR true ,
.BR yes ,
or
.B 1
to disable file logging. Set to
.BR false ,
.BR no ,
or
.B 0
to keep file logging enabled. If omitted, the default is
.BR false .
.B --gen-config
writes this setting as
.BR false .
.PP
Sections:
.TP
.B [exclude]
Patterns to skip. Glob is the default; to use regex, prefix with
.BR re: " or " regex: .
.TP
.B [include]
Patterns to allow hidden paths. Glob is the default; to use regex, prefix with
.BR re: " or " regex: .
.PP
Lines starting with
.B #
or
.B //
are treated as comments.
.SH COMPLETIONS
Shell completions are installed to:
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/bash-completion/completions/rnm
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/fish/vendor_completions.d/rnm.fish
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/zsh/site-functions/_rnm
.TP
.I ~/.config/nushell/completions/rnm.nu
.PP
Bash, fish, and zsh paths respect
.BR XDG_DATA_HOME .
Nushell completions respect
.BR XDG_CONFIG_HOME .
.SH CASE STYLES
.TP
.B camelCase
Example:
.I myVariableName
.TP
.B PascalCase
Example:
.I MyVariableName
.TP
.B snake_case
Example:
.I my_variable_name
.TP
.B SCREAMING_SNAKE_CASE
Example:
.I MAX_BUFFER_SIZE
.TP
.B kebab-case
Example:
.I my-variable-name
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
Base directory for configuration and Nushell completion installation (defaults
to
.IR ~/.config ).
Must be absolute when set.
.TP
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
Base directory for man page and bash, fish, and zsh completion installation
(defaults to
.IR ~/.local/share ).
Must be absolute when set.
.TP
.B XDG_STATE_HOME
Base directory for logs and the latest rollback script (defaults to
.IR ~/.local/state ).
Must be absolute when set.
.TP
.B NO_COLOR
Disable colored output when set.
.TP
.B RNM_SOURCE_DIR
Optional absolute path to the source tree containing
.IR man/
and
.IR completions/
when running maintenance from an installed binary without an adjacent bundle.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.RS
rnm .
.RE
.PP
.RS
rnm -d ./Downloads
.RE
.PP
.RS
rnm --install
.RE
.PP
.RS
rnm --install --install-completions=all
.RE
.PP
.RS
rnm --update --install-completions=detect
.RE
.PP
.RS
rnm --purge
.RE
